Around 7500 BP, forests on the island of Corsica were predominantly comprised of deciduous oaks. However, the evergreen holm oak invaded in 3000-4000 BP and now comprises almost half of the broad-leaved trees on the island.  During this time there is thought to have been a source-sink inversion (Dias 1996) in which the blue tit (Parus caeruleus) population became adapted to the evergreen forest and maladapted to the remaining small patches of deciduous forest on the island of Corsica. 

The mainland near Corsica is still predominately comprised of deciduous oaks and contains some evergreen oak areas, providing a point of comparison for the dynamics occurring on Corsica.  Previous studies have shown differences in the breeding biology of blue tits between mainland (deciduous) and Corsican (evergreen) populations.  Blue tits in evergreen habitats delay laying eggs one month later than those in the deciduous habitat, which appears to correspond with the delay in the leafing out of the trees (ref).  In addition caterpillar peakdate, the blue tits’ primary food source in this region, is roughly one month later in the Corsican evergreen habitat (ref).  Therefore there appears to be a matching of breeding and egg laying times for both habitats.  Further research has found a genetic basis for the differences in blue tit laying dates between the mainland (deciduous) population and the Corsican (evergreen) population (ref).  

Dias and Blondel 1996 argues that source-sink dynamics are functioning in both regions, maintaining maladapted populations in the less common habitat type.  The sinks are maintained via gene flow from the source populations, resulting in a mismatch of breeding and egg laying times in the sink habitat thereby preventing utilization of peak food availability.  Since Corsica was historically comprised mostly of deciduous oaks there must have been a shift in specialization from the deciduous habitat to the evergreen habitat in order for current conditions to exist. The adapted response to habitat type is not solely a function of habitat quality but rather its frequency.
We will use this system as the motivation for our source-sink inversion model in an effort to answer the question (as asked by Dias and Blondel 1996): “at which threshold of frequency of habitat types and population sizes will the selection regime shift from specialization to one habitat type to specialization to the other type?” 