IntroductionChanges to the amount, type and/or quality of habitat can impact the population dynamics of species in the habitat.  In this paper we investigate one potential consequence of habitat disturbance: a source-sink inversion.  We begin by defining a source-sink inversion and outlining potential causes.  We then provide information on the great tits population as the case study motivating our theoretical modeling.  Finally, we develop a model and explore the conditions resulting in a source-sink inversion.Source-Sink InversionsPulliam (1996) proposed a theoretical model called a “source-sink” model to describe how populations respond to habitat heterogeneity.  Heterogeneity in habitat type can be described in terms of quality of habitat (e.g. good versus bad), or in terms of type (e.g. deciduous oak vs. evergreen oak).  Under the source-sink model whenever heterogeneity of either type is present one habitat type can be classified as the source, and the other the sink.  The source is the higher quality habitat, or the habitat to which the majority of the species are adapted.  In the source habitat the average replacement rate is greater than one, i.e., the population is more than able to replace itself.  Sinks, on the other hand, have replacement rates less than one and cannot persist on their own.  In the typical source-sink model individuals disperse from the source habitats to the sink habitats.Source-sink inversions happen when the former sink becomes a source, and the former source becomes a sink.  Inversions can occur over varying time scales.  Johnson (2004) suggests that an inversion can occur slowly at an evolutionary time scale, or on a very short time scale due to rapidly fluctuating environmental factors.  The causes of inversions are linked to the time frames over which the inversion occurs, and can also vary.  Donahue, Holyoak, and Feng (2003) identify five potential causes of source sink inversion:1.	Succession leading to habitat quality/type changes (Pulliam 1996);2.	Habitat degradation (Doak 1995);3.	Transition of psuedosinks  to sources (Boughton 1999);4.	Changes in relative frequency of source and sink populations and subsequent adaptation (Dias 1996); and5.	Transfer (subsidy) of resource (e.g. prey, detritus, or nutrients) from one habitat to the other.There are few documented examples of source-sinks inversions.  The two commonly cited inversions are the blue tit inversion (described in the following section), and a pseudo-sink inversion in butterfly populations identified by Boughton (1999).  Boughton (1999) found that colonization of source patches by the butterflies is sensitive to frost.  In particular, early frosts occurred in the source patches inhibiting the ability for occupying butterflies to reproduce.  The former source patches were then recolonized by members of the former pseudo-sinks.  Thus the former pseudo-sink had become a source.Blue Tit Case-StudyAround 7500 BP, forests on the island of Corsica were predominantly comprised of deciduous oaks. However, the evergreen holm oak invaded in 3000-4000 BP and now comprises almost half of the broad-leaved trees on the island.  During this time there is thought to have been a source-sink inversion (Dias 1996) in which the blue tit (Parus caeruleus) population became adapted to the evergreen forest and maladapted to the remaining small patches of deciduous forest on the island of Corsica. The mainland near Corsica is still predominately comprised of deciduous oaks and contains some evergreen oak areas, providing a point of comparison for the dynamics occurring on Corsica.  Previous studies have shown differences in the breeding biology of blue tits between mainland (deciduous) and Corsican (evergreen) populations.  Blue tits in evergreen habitats delay laying eggs one month later than those in the deciduous habitat, which appears to correspond with the delay in the leafing out of the trees (ref).  In addition caterpillar peakdate, the blue tits’ primary food source in this region, is roughly one month later in the Corsican evergreen habitat (ref).  Therefore there appears to be a matching of breeding and egg laying times for both habitats.  Further research has found a genetic basis for the differences in blue tit laying dates between the mainland (deciduous) population and the Corsican (evergreen) population (ref).  Dias and Blondel 1996 argues that source-sink dynamics are functioning in both regions, maintaining maladapted populations in the less common habitat type.  The sinks are maintained via gene flow from the source populations, resulting in a mismatch of breeding and egg laying times in the sink habitat thereby preventing utilization of peak food availability.  Since Corsica was historically comprised mostly of deciduous oaks there must have been a shift in specialization from the deciduous habitat to the evergreen habitat in order for current conditions to exist. The adapted response to habitat type is not solely a function of habitat quality but rather its frequency.We will use this system as the motivation for our source-sink inversion model in an effort to answer the question (as asked by Dias and Blondel 1996): “at which threshold of frequency of habitat types and population sizes will the selection regime shift from specialization to one habitat type to specialization to the other type?” ReferencesBoughton, D. A. 1999. Empirical Evidence for Complex Source-Sink Dynamics with Alternative States in a Butterfly Metapopulation. Ecology 80:2727-2739.Dias, P.C. 1996. Sources and sinks in population biology. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 11, no. 8: 326–330. Donahue, M.J., Holyoak, M. & C. Feng. 2003. Patterns of Dispersal and Dynamics among Habitat Patches Varying in Quality. The American Naturalist, Vol. 162, No. 3 (Sep., 2003), pp. 302-317.Doak, D. F. 1995. Source-sink models and the problem of habitat degradation: general models and applications to the Yellowstone grizzly. Conservation Biology 9: 1370-1379.Johnson, D. M. 2004. Source-sink dynamics in a temporally heterogeneous environment. Ecology 85:2037–2045.Polis, G. A., W. B. Anderson, and R. D. Holt. 1997. Toward an integration of landscape and food web ecology: the dynamics of spatially subsidized food webs. Annual Re-view of Ecology and Systematics 28:289-316.Pulliam, H.R. 1996. Sources and sinks: empirical evidence and population consequences. Pages 45-69 in O. E. Rhodes, Jr., R. K. Chesser, and M. H. Smith, eds. Population dynamics in ecological space and time. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.